---
title: "SE 443: Network Cyber Security Project פרויקט סייבר רשתות"
collection: teaching
type: "Course"
permalink: /teaching/5785-se443
venue: "Kinneret College on the Sea of Galilee, Software Engineering"
date: 2025-03-16
location: "Kinneret College on the Sea of Galilee"
---

Semester 2, 5785

### Course Details:

  * **Lecture:** Sunday 08:00-10:00 in Room 6201
  * **Targil:** Monday 08:00-10:00 in Room 6201
  * **Instructor:** Michael J. May
  * **Email:** mjmay (at) kinneret,ac,il

The full detailed syllabus of the course is available [here](/syllabus/Network-Cyber-Syllabus-Spring-5785.pdf).

-----

### Topics:

The course is project-based on the topics of network protocol and web cyber attack and defense. The course is divided into three parts:

1.  Network cyber security research
2.  Network protocol cyber security and attacks.
3.  Web cyber security and attacks

Each part of the course has an accompanying assignment and presentation associated with it.

### Goals:

At the end of the course the student will be able to:

1.  Research and present research findings from recent academic publications on network cyber security.
2.  Perform network protocol exploit tasks and present findings to others.
3.  Perform web exploit tasks and present findings to others.

-----

### Reading

The following books contain useful course material. Since the course is a project-based course, there will not be regular assigned readings.

  * Wenliang Du. *Computer & Internet Security: A Hands-on Approach.* Wenliang Du, 3rd ed. edition, May 2022.
  * Arthur Salmon, Warun Levesque, and Michael McLafferty. *Applied Network Security : Master the Art of Detecting and Averting Advanced Network Security Attacks and Techniques.* Packt Publishing, 2017.

-----

### Assignments

There are three project assignments for the course, one for each part of the class.

> Cyber Security Research Presentation (20%): [Cyber Networks Research](/se443/443-Assignment1-Cyber-networks-research-assignment.pdf). Due: **7 April 2025**
>
> Network protocol cyber security project and presentation (35%): [Network Cyber Security Lab](/se443/425-Assignment2-Hashing.pdf). Due: **11 May 2025**
>
> Web cyber security project and presentation (35%): [Hacking Web Security Project](https://www.google.com/search?q=se443/443-Assignment3-Web-Hacking-Lab.pdf). Due: **16 June 2025**
>
> Project presentation quiz grades (10%): Due: **29 June 2025**

Assignments are on [Moodle](https://moodle85.kinneret.ac.il). More details of assignments will be given during the course of the semester.

-----

### Grading Criteria

Final grades will be calculated by combining grades from student participation, the midterm exam, and projects. The grades are weighted as follows:

  * 20% Cyber security research presentation
  * 35% Network protocol cyber security project and presentation
  * 35% Web cyber security project and presentation
  * 10% Project presentation quiz grades

-----

### Lecture Slides and Notes

| \# | Date | Topic | Slides |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1a | 16 March | Course Introduction: Network Cyber Security Basics | [[pdf]](/se443/443-Lecture1-Course-Intro.pdf) \<br\> [[BGP]](/se443/443-Lecture1-BGP%2520and%2520BGP%2520Security.pdf) [[Paper Slides]](/se443/Lecture1-sico19.pptx) |
| 1b | 17 March | Cyber Security Research Work | |
| 2a | 23 March | Cyber Security Research Work | |
| 2b | 24 March | Cyber Security Research Work | |
| 3a | 31 March | Cyber Security Research Work | |
| 3b | 6 April | Cyber Security Research Work | |
| 4a | 7 April | Cyber security research presentations | |
| 4b | 20 April | Cyber security research presentations | |
| 5a | 21 April | Cyber security research presentations | |
| 5b | 27 April | Cyber security research presentations | |
| 6a | 28 April | Network protocol cyber security lab work | |
| 6b | 4 May | Network protocol cyber security lab work | |
| 7a | 5 May | Network protocol cyber security lab work | |
| 7b | 11 May | Network protocol cyber security lab work | |
| 8a | 12 May | Network protocol cyber security lab presentations | |
| 8b | 18 May | Network protocol cyber security lab presentations | |
| 9a | 19 May | Network protocol cyber security lab presentations | |
| 9b | 25 May | Network protocol cyber security lab presentations | |
| 10a | 26 May | Web cyber security lab work | |
| 10b | 8 June | Web cyber security lab work | |
| 11a | 9 June | Web cyber security lab work | |
| 11b | 15 June | Web cyber security lab work | |
| 12a | 16 June | Web cyber security lab presentations | |
| 12b | 22 June | Web cyber security lab presentations | |
| 13a | 23 June | Web cyber security lab presentations | |
| 13b | 29 June | Web cyber security lab presentations | |

-----

### Academic Integrity

This course will abide by Kinneret College's code of academic integrity. In particular, for individual projects and group projects, the following guidelines should be followed.

Cheating of any sort will not be tolerated. Student collaboration is encouraged, but within limits as set forth in the college's rules on academic integrity. Any students caught cheating will be immediately referred to the department head and the Dean and may receive a failing grade for the course.

Cheating includes:

  * Copying information, content, or verbatim text from other students, internet sites, books (other than the ones listed in the bibliography), other unaffiliated individuals to answer questions, solve problems, or aid in programming projects.
  * Copying or submitting source code, documentation, or other programming aids **without attribution** from other students, **web sites**, online repositories, text books, open source programs, or other unaffiliated individuals.
  * Project teams which submit work which is identical or substantially identical to work submitted by other project teams, whether current or from previous years.
  * Other forms of academic misconduct as described [here](https://catalog.upenn.edu/pennbook/code-of-academic-integrity/) or as reasonably assessed by the instructor, program head, or dean.

If you have any questions about what constitutes cheating in the above rules, contact the instructor as early as possible.